README.md, before:

# Crash Recovery and Diagnostics for Kubernetes
A tool to help collect and analyze node information for troubleshooting unresponsive Kubernetes clusters.

This tool is designed for human operators to run against some or all nodes of a troubled or unresponsive cluster to collect logs, configurations, or any other node resource for analysis to help with troubleshotting of Kubernetes.  

## `Crash-Diagnostics`
The tool is compiled into a a single binary named `crash-dianostics`.  Currently, the binary supports two commands:

```
Usage:
  crash-diagnotics [command]

Available Commands:
  help        Help about any command
  run         Executes a diagnostics script file
```

Command `run` uses a diagnostics file to script how and what resources to are collected from cluster machines. By default, `crash-diagnostics run` searches for script for `Diagnostics.file` which specifies line-by-line directives and commands that are interpreted into actions to be executed against the nodes in the cluster.

```
> crash-diagnostics run --help

Usage:
  crash-diagnotics run [flags]

Flags:
      --file string     the path to the dianostics script file to run (default "Diagnostics.file")
      --output string   the path of the generated archive file (default "out.tar.gz")
```


For instance, the following command will execte file `./Diagnostics.file` and store any collected data in file `out.tar.gz`:

```
crash-diagnostics run
```

To run a different script file  or specify a different output archive, use the flags shown below: 

```
crash-diagnostics --file test-cluster.file -output test-cluster.tar.gz
```

## Diagnotics.file Format
`Diagnostics.file` uses a simple line-by-line format (à la Dockerfile) to specify directives on how to collect data from cluster servers:

```
DIRECTIVE [arguments]
```

A directive can either be a `preamble` for runtime configuration or an `action` which can execute a command that runs on each specified host. 

### Example Diagnostics.file
The following is a sample Diagnostics.file that captures command output and copy files from two hosts:
```
FROM 127.0.0.1:22 192.168.99.7:22
WORKDIR /tmp/crashdir

COPY /var/log/kube-apiserver.log
CAPTURE df -h
CAPTURE df -i
CAPTURE netstat -an
CAPTURE ps -ef
CAPTURE lsof -i
CAPTURE journalctl -l -u kube-apiserver
COPY /var/log/kubelet.log
COPY /var/log/kube-proxy.log

OUTPUT path:/tmp/crashout/out.tar.gzip

```
In the previous example, the tool will collect information from servers `127.0.0.1:22` and `192.168.99.7:22` by executing the COPY and the CAPTURE 
commands specified in the file.  The colleted information is bundled into archive file `/tmp/crashout/out.tar.gzip` specified by `OUTPUT` (note that 
the output file can also be specified by flag `--output`).

## Diagnostics.file Directives
Currently, `crash-dianostics` supports the following directives:
```
AS
AUTHCONFIG
CAPTURE
COPY
ENV
FROM
KUBECONFIG
OUTPUT
WORKDIR
```
Each directive can receive named parameters to pass values to the command it represents.  Each named parameter uses an identifier followed by a colon `:` as shown below:
```
DIRECTIVE name0:<param value 0> name1:<param value 1> ... nameN:<param value N>
```
Optionally, some directives can be declared with a single default parameter value as shown below:
```
DIRECTIVE <default param value>
```
As an example, directive `WORKDIR` can be declared in the following two ways:
```
WORKDIR path:/some/path
```
Or `WORKDIR` can be declared with an unamed parameter which is assumed to be the `path:` parameter:
```
WORKDIR /some/path
```

### AS
This directive specifies the `userid` and optional `groupid` to  use when `crash-diagnostics` execute its commands against the current machine.
```
AS userid:<userid> [groupid:<groupid>]
```
Example:
```
AS userid:100
```
Or
```
AS userid:vladimir groupid:200
```

### AUTHCONFIG
Configures the authentication for connections to remote node servers.  A `username` must be provide to used during authentication. A `private-key` must also be provided to be used in a private key/public certificate that can be used by tools such as SSH.

```
AUTHCONFIG username:<name> private-key:</path/to/private/key>
```

### CAPTURE
Executes a shell command on the specified machines (see `FROM` directive).  The result of the executed command is captured and saved in a file that is then added to the archived bundle for analysis.

`CAPTURE` can be declared followed by the command to execute as shown in this example:

```
CAPTURE /bin/journalctl -l -u kube-apiserver
```
The previous command can be declared with its named parameter `path:` as shown below:
```
CAPTURE path:"/bin/journalctl -l -u kube-apiserver"
```

### COPY
This action specifies one or more files (and/or directories) as data sources that are copied
into the arhive bundle.  The COPY command can be declared with its default unanmed parameter as shown below:

```
COPY /var/log/kube-proxy.log
```
The same command can also be declared with parameter name `paths:`
```
COPY paths:"/var/log/kube-proxy.log"
```

### ENV
This directive is used to inject environment variables that are made available to other commands at runtime. A diagnostics file can have one or more ENV commands declared.  In its default format, `ENV` is declared followed by a list of environment variables as shown below:

```
ENV Foo=bar Blat=bat
ENV BUZZ=BAZ
```
The `ENV` command can optinally used parameter name `vars:` as shown below:
```
ENV vars:"Foo=bar Blat=bat"
```

### FROM
This specifies a space-separated list of nodes from which data is collected.  Each 
host is specified by an address endpoint consisting of `<host-address>:<port>`. By default
the tool will use SSH as at runtime to interact with the specified remote hosts.

An address of `local` indicates that the current machine, where the `crash-diagnostics` binary, 
is running will be used as the source allowing the tool to directly access and execute commands.

```
FROM local 10.10.100.2:22
```
`FROM` can optionally include parameter name `hosts:` as shown below:
```
FROM hosts:"local 10.10.100.2:22"
```

### KUBECONFIG
This directive specifies the fully qualified path of the Kubernetes client configuration file. The
tool will use this value to load the Kubernetes configuration file to communicate with the API server to retrieve vital cluster information if available.  

In its default form, `KUBECONFIG` is declared followe by the path to the config file as shown below:

```
KUBECONFIG /path/to/kube/config
```

The command can optionally use parameter name `path:` for its parameter as follows:

```
KUBECONFIG path:"/path/to/kube/config"
```

By default, the following resourcess will be retrieved from the API server:

 * Namespaces
 * Nodes
 * Events
 * Replication Controllers
 * Services
 * DaemonSets
 * Deployments
 * ReplicaSets
 * Pods

If `KUBECONFIG` is not specified, the tool will attempt to search for:
 * Environment variable `KUBECONFIG`
 * If the `KUBECONFIG` env variable is not set, path $HOME/.kube/config will be used

If a Kubernetes configuration file is not found or the API server is unresponsive, cluster information will be skipped.

### OUTPUT
This preamble configures the the location and file name of the generated archive file that contains the collected information from the specified servers.  By default, `KUBECONFIG` is declared followed by the output path as shown below:

```
OUTPUT <path of archive file>
```
Optionally, the command may use parameter name `path:` to specify the path as shown below:
```
OUTPUT path:<path of archive file>
```

If `OUTPUT` is not specified, the tool applies the value of flag `--output` as specified on the command line at runtime.

### WORKDIR
Specifies the working directory used when building the archive bundle.  The directory is  used as temporary location to store data from all data sources specified in the file.  When the tar is built, the content of that directory is removed.

In its default form, `WORKDIR` is declared followed by the work directory path as shown below:

```
WORKDIR /tmp/crashdir
```
Optionally, `WORKDIR` may use parameter name `path:` as follows:
```
WORKDIR path:"/tmp/crashdir"
```

### Example File

```
FROM local 162.164.10.1:2222 162.164.10.2:2222
KUBECONFIG /home/username/.kube/kind-config-kind
AUTHCONFIG username:test private-key:/home/testuser/.ssh/id_rsa
WORKDIR /tmp/output

CAPTURE df -h
CAPTURE df -i
CAPTURE netstat -an
CAPTURE ps -ef
CAPTURE lsof -i

OUTPUT path:/tmp/crashout/out.tar.gz
```

### Comments
Each line that starts with with `#` is considered to be a comment and is ignored at runtime as shown in 
the following example:

```
# This shows how to comment your script
FROM local 162.164.10.1:2222 162.164.10.2:2222
KUBECONFIG /home/username/.kube/kind-config-kind
AUTHCONFIG username:test private-key:/home/testuser/.ssh/id_rsa
WORKDIR /tmp/output

# Capture the following commands
CAPTURE df -h
CAPTURE df -i
CAPTURE netstat -an
CAPTURE ps -ef
CAPTURE lsof -i

# send output here
OUTPUT path:/tmp/crashout/out.tar.gz
```

## Templating
The script also supports templated content to dynamically insert values when the tool runs. The file
uses the Go programming language's style of text template where attributes are wrapped in double curly braces `{{ .<template-attribute> }}`.  Currently, the following
attributes are supported:

* `{{.Home}}` - emits the home directory of the user running the `crash-diagnostics` binary
* `{{.Username}}` - emits the current username that runs the `crash-diagnostics` binary

The following script uses templated values that outputs the current `HOME` directory and
`username`:

```
FROM local 162.164.10.1:2222 162.164.10.2:2222
KUBECONFIG {{.Home}}/.kube/kind-config-kind
AUTHCONFIG username:{{.Username} private-key:{{.Home}}/.ssh/id_rsa
WORKDIR /tmp/output

CAPTURE df -h
CAPTURE df -i
CAPTURE netstat -an
CAPTURE ps -ef
CAPTURE lsof -i 

OUTPUT path:{{.Home}}/.crashout/out.tar.gz
```


## Compile and Run
`crash-diagnostics` is written in Go and requires version 1.11 or later.  Clone the source from its repo or download it to your local directory.  From the project's root directory, compile the code with the
following:

```
GO111MODULE="on" go install .
```

This should place the compiled `crash-diagnostics` binary in `$(go env GOPATH)/bin`.  You can test this with:
```
crash-dianostics --help
```
If this does not work properly, ensure that your Go environment is setup properly.

Next run crash-diagonostics using the sample Diagnostics.file in this directory. Ensure to update it to reflect your
current environment:

```
crash-diagnostics run --output crashd.tar.gzip --loglevel debug
```

You should see log messages on the screen similar to the following:
```
DEBU[0000] Parsing script file
DEBU[0000] Parsing [1: FROM local]
DEBU[0000] FROM parsed OK
DEBU[0000] Parsing [2: WORKDIR /tmp/crasdir]
...
DEBU[0000] Archiving [/tmp/crashdir] in out.tar.gz
DEBU[0000] Archived /tmp/crashdir/local/df_-i.txt
DEBU[0000] Archived /tmp/crashdir/local/lsof_-i.txt
DEBU[0000] Archived /tmp/crashdir/local/netstat_-an.txt
DEBU[0000] Archived /tmp/crashdir/local/ps_-ef.txt
DEBU[0000] Archived /tmp/crashdir/local/var/log/syslog
INFO[0000] Created archive out.tar.gz
INFO[0002] Created archive out.tar.gz
INFO[0002] Output done
```

## Contributing

New contributors will need to sign a CLA (contributor license agreement). Details are described in our [contributing](CONTRIBUTING.md) documentation.


## License
This project is available under the [Apache License, Version 2.0](LICENSE.txt)

Commit message:

Better command parsing, quoted value support
Signed-off-by: Vladimir Vivien <vivienv@vmware.com>

README.md, after:

# Crash Recovery and Diagnostics for Kubernetes
A tool to help collect and analyze node information for troubleshooting unresponsive Kubernetes clusters.

This tool is designed for human operators to run against some or all nodes of a troubled or unresponsive cluster to collect logs, configurations, or any other node resource for analysis to help with troubleshotting of Kubernetes.  

## `Crash-Diagnostics`
The tool is compiled into a a single binary named `crash-dianostics`.  Currently, the binary supports two commands:

```
Usage:
  crash-diagnotics [command]

Available Commands:
  help        Help about any command
  run         Executes a diagnostics script file
```

Command `run` uses a diagnostics file to script how and what resources to are collected from cluster machines. By default, `crash-diagnostics run` searches for script for `Diagnostics.file` which specifies line-by-line directives and commands that are interpreted into actions to be executed against the nodes in the cluster.

```
> crash-diagnostics run --help

Usage:
  crash-diagnotics run [flags]

Flags:
      --file string     the path to the dianostics script file to run (default "Diagnostics.file")
      --output string   the path of the generated archive file (default "out.tar.gz")
```


For instance, the following command will execte file `./Diagnostics.file` and store any collected data in file `out.tar.gz`:

```
crash-diagnostics run
```

To run a different script file  or specify a different output archive, use the flags shown below: 

```
crash-diagnostics --file test-cluster.file -output test-cluster.tar.gz
```

## Diagnotics.file Format
`Diagnostics.file` uses a simple line-by-line format (à la Dockerfile) to specify directives on how to collect data from cluster servers:

```
DIRECTIVE [arguments]
```

A directive can either be a `preamble` for runtime configuration or an `action` which can execute a command that runs on each specified host. 

### Example Diagnostics.file
The following is a sample Diagnostics.file that captures command output and copy files from two hosts:
```
FROM 127.0.0.1:22 192.168.99.7:22
WORKDIR /tmp/crashdir

COPY /var/log/kube-apiserver.log
CAPTURE df -h
CAPTURE df -i
CAPTURE netstat -an
CAPTURE ps -ef
CAPTURE lsof -i
CAPTURE journalctl -l -u kube-apiserver
COPY /var/log/kubelet.log
COPY /var/log/kube-proxy.log

OUTPUT path:/tmp/crashout/out.tar.gzip

```
In the previous example, the tool will collect information from servers `127.0.0.1:22` and `192.168.99.7:22` by executing the COPY and the CAPTURE 
commands specified in the file.  The colleted information is bundled into archive file `/tmp/crashout/out.tar.gzip` specified by `OUTPUT` (note that 
the output file can also be specified by flag `--output`).

## Diagnostics.file Directives
Currently, `crash-dianostics` supports the following directives:
```
AS
AUTHCONFIG
CAPTURE
COPY
ENV
FROM
KUBECONFIG
OUTPUT
WORKDIR
```
Each directive can receive named parameters that pass values to the command it represents.  Each named parameter uses an identifier that  is followed by a colon `:` and the value of the paramter as shown below:

```
DIRECTIVE name0:<param value 0> name1:<param value 1> ... nameN:<param value N>
```
Example:

```
OUTPUT path:/tmp/crashout/out.tar.gz
```

The value of the parameter may also be quoted if necessary to capture spaces as shown in the following example:

```
CAPTURE cmd:'/bin/echo "HELLO WORLD!"'
```

Optionally, some directives can be declared with a single default parameter value as shown below:

```
DIRECTIVE <default param value>
```

The following shows an example of directive `WORKDIR` declared with a default (unamed) parameter:

```
OUTPUT /tmp/crashout/out.tar.gz
```

This can also be done by quoting the default parameter as shown below:

```
OUTPUT "/tmp/crashout/out.tar.gz"
```

### AS
This directive specifies the `userid` and optional `groupid` to  use when `crash-diagnostics` execute its commands against the current machine.
```
AS userid:<userid> [groupid:<groupid>]
```
Example:
```
AS userid:100
```
Or
```
AS userid:vladimir groupid:200
```

### AUTHCONFIG
Configures the authentication for connections to remote node servers.  A `username` must be provide to used during authentication. A `private-key` must also be provided to be used in a private key/public certificate that can be used by tools such as SSH.

```
AUTHCONFIG username:<name> private-key:</path/to/private/key>
```

### CAPTURE
Executes a shell command on the specified machines (see `FROM` directive).  The result of the executed command is captured and saved in a file that is then added to the archived bundle for analysis.

`CAPTURE` can be declared followed by the command to execute as shown in this example:

```
CAPTURE /bin/journalctl -l -u kube-apiserver
```
Or:

```
CAPTURE path:"/bin/journalctl -l -u kube-apiserver"
```

### COPY
This action specifies one or more files (and/or directories) as data sources that are copied
into the arhive bundle.  The COPY command can be declared with its default unanmed parameter as shown below:

```
COPY /var/log/kube-proxy.log
```

Or,
```
COPY paths:"/var/log/kube-proxy.log"
```

### ENV
This directive is used to inject environment variables that are made available to other commands at runtime. A diagnostics file can have one or more ENV commands declared.  In its default format, `ENV` is declared followed by a list of environment variables as shown below:

```
ENV Foo=bar Blat=bat
ENV BUZZ=BAZ
```
The `ENV` command can optinally used parameter name `vars:` as shown below:
```
ENV vars:"Foo=bar Blat=bat"
```

### FROM
This specifies a space-separated list of nodes from which data is collected.  Each 
host is specified by an address endpoint consisting of `<host-address>:<port>`. By default
the tool will use SSH as at runtime to interact with the specified remote hosts.

An address of `local` indicates that the current machine, where the `crash-diagnostics` binary, 
is running will be used as the source allowing the tool to directly access and execute commands.

```
FROM local 10.10.100.2:22
```
`FROM` can optionally include parameter name `hosts:` as shown below:
```
FROM hosts:"local 10.10.100.2:22"
```

### KUBECONFIG
This directive specifies the fully qualified path of the Kubernetes client configuration file. The
tool will use this value to load the Kubernetes configuration file to communicate with the API server to retrieve vital cluster information if available.  

In its default form, `KUBECONFIG` is declared followe by the path to the config file as shown below:

```
KUBECONFIG /path/to/kube/config
```

The command can optionally use parameter name `path:` for its parameter as follows:

```
KUBECONFIG path:"/path/to/kube/config"
```

By default, the following resourcess will be retrieved from the API server:

 * Namespaces
 * Nodes
 * Events
 * Replication Controllers
 * Services
 * DaemonSets
 * Deployments
 * ReplicaSets
 * Pods

If `KUBECONFIG` is not specified, the tool will attempt to search for:
 * Environment variable `KUBECONFIG`
 * If the `KUBECONFIG` env variable is not set, path $HOME/.kube/config will be used

If a Kubernetes configuration file is not found or the API server is unresponsive, cluster information will be skipped.

### OUTPUT
This preamble configures the the location and file name of the generated archive file that contains the collected information from the specified servers.  By default, `KUBECONFIG` is declared followed by the output path as shown below:

```
OUTPUT <path of archive file>
```
Optionally, the command may use parameter name `path:` to specify the path as shown below:
```
OUTPUT path:<path of archive file>
```

If `OUTPUT` is not specified, the tool applies the value of flag `--output` as specified on the command line at runtime.

### WORKDIR
Specifies the working directory used when building the archive bundle.  The directory is  used as temporary location to store data from all data sources specified in the file.  When the tar is built, the content of that directory is removed.

In its default form, `WORKDIR` is declared followed by the work directory path as shown below:

```
WORKDIR /tmp/crashdir
```
Optionally, `WORKDIR` may use parameter name `path:` as follows:
```
WORKDIR path:"/tmp/crashdir"
```

### Example File

```
FROM local 162.164.10.1:2222 162.164.10.2:2222
KUBECONFIG /home/username/.kube/kind-config-kind
AUTHCONFIG username:test private-key:/home/testuser/.ssh/id_rsa
WORKDIR /tmp/output

CAPTURE df -h
CAPTURE df -i
CAPTURE netstat -an
CAPTURE ps -ef
CAPTURE lsof -i

OUTPUT path:/tmp/crashout/out.tar.gz
```

### Comments
Each line that starts with with `#` is considered to be a comment and is ignored at runtime as shown in 
the following example:

```
# This shows how to comment your script
FROM local 162.164.10.1:2222 162.164.10.2:2222
KUBECONFIG /home/username/.kube/kind-config-kind
AUTHCONFIG username:test private-key:/home/testuser/.ssh/id_rsa
WORKDIR /tmp/output

# Capture the following commands
CAPTURE df -h
CAPTURE df -i
CAPTURE netstat -an
CAPTURE ps -ef
CAPTURE lsof -i

# send output here
OUTPUT path:/tmp/crashout/out.tar.gz
```

## Templating
The script also supports templated content to dynamically insert values when the tool runs. The file
uses the Go programming language's style of text template where attributes are wrapped in double curly braces `{{ .<template-attribute> }}`.  Currently, the following
attributes are supported:

* `{{.Home}}` - emits the home directory of the user running the `crash-diagnostics` binary
* `{{.Username}}` - emits the current username that runs the `crash-diagnostics` binary

The following script uses templated values that outputs the current `HOME` directory and
`username`:

```
FROM local 162.164.10.1:2222 162.164.10.2:2222
KUBECONFIG {{.Home}}/.kube/kind-config-kind
AUTHCONFIG username:{{.Username} private-key:{{.Home}}/.ssh/id_rsa
WORKDIR /tmp/output

CAPTURE df -h
CAPTURE df -i
CAPTURE netstat -an
CAPTURE ps -ef
CAPTURE lsof -i 

OUTPUT path:{{.Home}}/.crashout/out.tar.gz
```


## Compile and Run
`crash-diagnostics` is written in Go and requires version 1.11 or later.  Clone the source from its repo or download it to your local directory.  From the project's root directory, compile the code with the
following:

```
GO111MODULE="on" go install .
```

This should place the compiled `crash-diagnostics` binary in `$(go env GOPATH)/bin`.  You can test this with:
```
crash-dianostics --help
```
If this does not work properly, ensure that your Go environment is setup properly.

Next run crash-diagonostics using the sample Diagnostics.file in this directory. Ensure to update it to reflect your
current environment:

```
crash-diagnostics run --output crashd.tar.gzip --loglevel debug
```

You should see log messages on the screen similar to the following:
```
DEBU[0000] Parsing script file
DEBU[0000] Parsing [1: FROM local]
DEBU[0000] FROM parsed OK
DEBU[0000] Parsing [2: WORKDIR /tmp/crasdir]
...
DEBU[0000] Archiving [/tmp/crashdir] in out.tar.gz
DEBU[0000] Archived /tmp/crashdir/local/df_-i.txt
DEBU[0000] Archived /tmp/crashdir/local/lsof_-i.txt
DEBU[0000] Archived /tmp/crashdir/local/netstat_-an.txt
DEBU[0000] Archived /tmp/crashdir/local/ps_-ef.txt
DEBU[0000] Archived /tmp/crashdir/local/var/log/syslog
INFO[0000] Created archive out.tar.gz
INFO[0002] Created archive out.tar.gz
INFO[0002] Output done
```

## Contributing

New contributors will need to sign a CLA (contributor license agreement). Details are described in our [contributing](CONTRIBUTING.md) documentation.


## License
This project is available under the [Apache License, Version 2.0](LICENSE.txt)
